                       ZIPList5 Max User's Guide
                 Copyright (c) 1995 - 2012 CD Light, LLC
                         All Rights Reserved
                             February 2012


CONTENTS OF THIS DOCUMENT

New This Month
Other Recent Changes
Overview
Installation
Importing into a Database Program
Record Layout
Additional ZIP Code Information


NEW THIS MONTH

For February 2012 the US Postal Service added 1 new 5-digit ZIP code, deleted 
11 existing 5-digit ZIP codes, and renamed 8 existing 5-digit ZIP codes.

    Added   09848  M  APO, AE

    Deleted 09771  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 09862  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 11736  U  Farmingdale, NY
    Deleted 32215  P  Jacksonville, FL
    Deleted 32230  P  Jacksonville, FL
    Deleted 32590  P  Pensacola, FL
    Deleted 32592  P  Pensacola, FL
    Deleted 32613  P  Gainesville, FL
    Deleted 35041  P  Cardiff, AL
    Deleted 41747  P  Hardburly, KY
    Deleted 45110  P  Buford, OH

    Renamed 09308 from APO to DPO AE
    Renamed 09338 from APO to DPO AE
    Renamed 09348 from APO to DPO AE
    Renamed 09374 from APO to DPO AE
    Renamed 09378 from APO to DPO AE
    Renamed 09393 from APO to DPO AE
    Renamed 29905 from Beaufort to Parris Island SC
    Renamed 29907 from Ladys Island to Beaufort SC

The number of active ZIP codes is 41,861


OTHER RECENT CHANGES

For January 2012 the US Postal Service added 1 new 5-digit ZIP code, deleted 
15 existing 5-digit ZIP codes, and renamed 2 existing 5-digit ZIP codes.

    Added   10200     New York, NY

    Deleted 09304  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 09312  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 09316  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 09321  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 09331  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 09332  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 09333  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 09344  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 09359  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 09596  M  FPO, AE
    Deleted 29573  P  Minturn, SC
    Deleted 45145  P  Marathon, OH
    Deleted 48950  U  Lansing, MI
    Deleted 55555  P  Young America, MN
    Deleted 64869  P  Waco, MO

    Renamed 31407 from Savannah to Port Wentworth GA
    Renamed 81034 from Crowley to Ordway CO

The number of active ZIP codes is 41,871


For December 2011 the US Postal Service added 0 new 5-digit ZIP codes, deleted 
11 existing 5-digit ZIP codes, and renamed 0 existing 5-digit ZIP codes.

    Deleted 09315  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 09317  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 09342  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 09350  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 09391  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 09396  M  APO, AE
    Deleted 30544  P  Habersham, GA
    Deleted 41338     Island City, KY
    Deleted 47139  P  Little York, IN
    Deleted 47614  P  Folsomville, IN
    Deleted 57253  U  Milbank, SD

The number of active ZIP codes is 41,885


ZIP CODES CHANGE EVERY MONTH

You have received from us THE MOST ACCURATE AND UP-TO-DATE list of ZIP codes
you can get anywhere! EACH MONTH THE USPS ADDS, DELETES, OR MODIFIES DOZENS OF
ZIP CODES. Yes, they do ADD AND DELETE ZIP codes each month! We get the
current list of every active ZIP code directly from the US Postal Service each
month. If you can't find a ZIP code in our database, there is just one simple
reason: your ZIP code is not an active ZIP code at this time! If your list of
ZIP codes is a few years old, there may be thousands of differences between
your list and the current list of active ZIP codes. Isn't that exactly why you
obtained the data from us? Then you shouldn't be surprised if you find that
our database differs from your list. Our database is correct. If you were to
get the data directly from the USPS you would find exactly the same ZIP codes
as in our database. And it would cost you a lot more!


CONTENTS

ZIPList5 Max includes the following files:

      Z5Max.txt        - ZIPList5 Max database file
      z5maxdoc.txt     - ZIPList5 Max documentation (this file)
      z5maxlic.txt     - ZIPList5 Max end-user license
      stfips.txt       - State FIPS database file
      msapmsa.txt      - MSA/PMSA database file
      msadoc.txt       - MSA/PMSA documentation
      malist.txt       - Market Area file, table format
      malist.csv       - Market Area file, CSV format
      ac.txt           - Area code list in CSV format

END-USER LICENSE

Please read the accompanying license document, Z5MAXLIC.TXT, which defines 
your rights and restrictions for using ZIPList5 Max. Your license level is
indicated on the invoice for ZIPList5 Max issued to you by CD Light.
 

OVERVIEW

ZIPList5 Max is a database of every ZIP code in the United States and its
territories to which the US Postal Service delivers mail. The database
contains the city name, state abbreviation, county name and county FIPS code,
primary telephone area code, time zone, Daylight Saving Time flag, latitude,
longitude, MSA, PMSA, city name abbreviation, and market area for each of the 
nearly 42,500 ZIP codes defined by the USPS. Additionally, the database also 
includes approximately 29,000 "alias" city name records, for a total of 
approximately 71,500 records.

The database is formatted as a comma delimited ASCII text file, making it easy
to import the data into most database programs. The text file can also be
searched by most text editors and word processors, although the size of the
file (6.5 MB) can be a problem for some text editors. 

The data in this database was compiled by CD Light from a variety of sources,
including the US Postal Service, maps, published telephone books, direct
communication with various telephone companies, and Bellcore. We have invested
considerable effort in making this list as accurate as possible. 

Because this database is a simple text file, it can be used on almost every
type of computer, including PCs and compatibles, Macintoshes, and UNIX
workstations. 

Caution: not all of the city names in this database are approved by the US
Postal Service for use for mail delivery. City names with the Preferred? flag
set to "N" are alias names which are NOT approved for mail delivery to the
associated ZIP code. Note that a particular city name MAY be approved for
delivery to some ZIP codes and not others. See the discussion below for more
information on the file format and proper use of the Preferred? flag.


COUNTY, ZIP CODE, AND AREA CODE BOUNDARIES

County boundaries, state boundaries, ZIP code boundaries, area
code boundaries, and time zone boundaries are all administered by different 
federal, state, and local government and private agencies. As you probably 
already know, cooperation between these various agencies is virtually 
nonexistent. As a result, these various boundaries do not necessarily align. 
This means that a given ZIP code area may actually cross one or more county, 
area code, and/or time zone boundaries. But each ZIP code record in 
ZIPList5 Max has only a single field each for county name, area code, or time 
zone. An attempt to add additional records to document all the variations 
which can occur would make the product too complex and difficult to use, and 
is beyond the scope of this inexpensive database.

We have attempted to provide the most accurate information for each ZIP code
by selecting the most prevalent county, area code, and time zone for each ZIP 
code in the database. However, you should be aware that because of this 
boundary alignment problem the county name and FIPS code, area code, and time 
zone provided for each ZIP code in the database may not apply to every address 
which lies within the boundaries of that ZIP code.

Where multiple area codes exist within one ZIP code zone we have selected the
most prevalent area code. This means that in areas such as Houston or the
State of Maryland where area code "overlays" exist, we list only one area code
- the one area code used by the most people in that area.

When a new area code is announced by the telephone companies, we update this
database only ON or AFTER the effective date when dialing with the new area
code is permissible. That way you are assured that all area codes in the
database are valid and active on the date the database was created.


INSTALLATION

ZIPList5 Max is available on CDROM or can be downloaded from our secure 
database server. The data content is the same in either case. You should 
select the proper installation notes below depending upon the the 
distribution medium you selected at the time you placed your order.

INSTALLATION from CDROM

ZIPList5 Max is available on the CDROM in a variety of different 
formats. Each file contains the exact same data, but the data has been 
formatted for a specific desktop database program. This means that all you 
need to do is select the proper format for your database program and simply 
copy the file containing that format from the CDROM to the proper folder on 
your computer. The files on the CDROM are not compressed.

To install this database from a CDROM, follow these steps:

   1. Identify the file which has the data in the format you wish to
      use. The following table identifies the various formats available
      on the CDROM for this database:

      File Name         Format
      Z5max.txt         Comma-delimited ASCII (also known as CSV)
      Z5maxA2K.mdb      MS Access 2000
      Z5maxA03.mdb      MS Access 2003
      Z5max.dbf         dBase/FoxPro
      Z5max.db          Paradox
      
   2. Using Windows Explorer, copy the file in the format of your choice from 
      the CDROM to the desired folder on your computer.

   3. Open the file using the database program of your choice.


INSTALLATION AFTER DOWNLOADING OVER THE INTERNET

ZIPList5 Max is available to download from our secure database server in a 
variety of different formats. Each file contains the exact same data, but the 
data has been formatted for a specific desktop database program. You should 
download the proper format for your database program. You can download more 
than one format, if you wish, and you can download the data as often as you 
need to. There is no charge for downloading the data more than once.

Most files on our database server have been compressed for faster downloading. 
These files must be decompressed before you can use them with your database 
program. To make the decompression easier, most of the files have been made 
"self-extracting", which means that you do not need to use a specific program 
to decompress the files - they decompress themselves!

To install ZIPList5 Max after downloading, follow these steps:

   1. Download the format of your choice from the secure database server. Be
      sure to save the file to your hard drive, and note the name of the file
      and the folder where it has been saved.

   2. If the file name ends in ".exe", such as Z5max.exe, the file is a
      "self-extracting" compressed file. To decompress the file you must 
      "run" the file as a program so that it can decompress itself. Just
      double-click on the file name using Windows Explorer. The file will 
      extract itself from the compressed form to its original format and 
      name. Hint: Windows Explorer may not show the file extensions, depending 
      upon settings in the View | Options menu.

   3. The actual database file name depends upon the format of the data:

      File Name         Format
      Z5max.txt         Comma-delimited ASCII (also known as CSV)
      Z5maxA2K.mdb      MS Access 2000
      Z5maxA03.mdb      MS Access 2003
      Z5max.dbf         dBase/FoxPro
      Z5max.db          Paradox
                      
   3. Open the file using the database program of your choice.


SUPPORT FILES

ZIPList5 Max contains several additional support files in ASCII text format
which you may find useful. These files can be found on the CDROM or in 
the folder where the compressed file was decompressed. Here are the files
you should find:

    FILE             CONTENT
    ac.txt           List of area codes for North America, including overlays
    stfips.txt       List of state FIPS codes and state abbreviations
    malist.csv       List of Market Areas in CSV format
    malist.txt       List of Market Areas in tabular format
    msapmsa.txt      List of MSAs, PMSAs, and CMSAs in tabular format
    msapmsa.csv      List of MSAs, PMSAs, and CMSAs in CSV format
    msadoc.txt       Information about MSAs, PMSAs, and CMSAs
    Z5maxdoc.txt     ZIPList5 Max documentation file (this file)
    Z5maxlic.txt     ZIPList5 Max license file
    cbsa.txt         List of CBSAs in tabular format (ANSI character set)
    cbsa.csv         List of CBSAs in CSV format (ANSI character set)
    cbsa_oem.txt     List of CBSAs in tabular format (ASCII character set)
    cbsa_oem.csv     List of CBSAs in CSV format  (ASCII character set)
    csa.txt          List of CSAs in tabular format
    csa.csv          List of CSAs in CSV format


SEARCHING Z5Max.TXT USING A TEXT EDITOR

Many text editors can work directly with Z5Max.TXT. Just open the file and
use the normal search commands to find a particular city, county, area code,
or ZIP code. However, some text editors, such as Windows Notepad, cannot
process a file as large as ZIPList5 Max.


SEARCHING USING A WORD PROCESSOR

Many word processing programs can import a text file and search it using the
normal search commands. If you must specify the import file format, choose
something like this: "ASCII (DOS) TEXT".


IMPORTING INTO A DATABASE PROGRAM

You may wish to import the Z5Max.TXT data file into a database program where
you will be able to search the data more efficiently and sort the data into an
order which better suites your needs. Z5Max.TXT can be used with almost any
commercial database program, such as Microsoft ACCESS, Paradox, dBase, FoxPro,
etc. Note: Excel is NOT a database program; it is a spreadsheet program. Excel
cannot handle the number of records contained in ZIPList5 Max.

To import ZIPList5 Max into a database program:

  1. Start your database program in the usual way. 

  2. Select "IMPORT" from one of the menus.

  3. Select the file to import: Z5Max.TXT

  4. If necessary, specify the import data format. Any of the following
     terms may be used to describe the text format of the Z5Max.TXT file:

     delimited text
     delimited ASCII
     comma delimited ASCII
     ASCII (DOS) text

After importing the data, save the converted data in the native format of the
database program. You should now be able to sort and search the data using the
normal sort and search functions of the database program.
     
You may wish to build an index for the database. Using an index may shorten
searches of the data by your database program. Note, however, that some
database programs cannot create an index for a data field which is not unique.
The data fields of Z5Max.TXT are not unique, since the same data can (and
often does) appear in more than one record of the file.


WHY ZIP CODES ARE NOT UNIQUE

The ZIPList5 Max ZIP code field is not unique (duplicates exist within the
database). The reason for this is that the database contains common local
(alias) names for many cities. Such a name is an alternate name by which that
city (or some part of that city) is known to local people. 

Some people object to using the "preferred" name specified by the US Postal
Service; these people may instead use some other, locally preferred name. This
can be quite confusing. Accordingly, we have included in the database these
"alias" city names, along with the ZIP codes to which they apply. This means
that a particular ZIP code may exist in a "preferred name" record and again in
one or more "alias name" records. 

The one preferred name record has the preferred field set to "P", while all
alias name records have the preferred field set to "A" or "N". Note that in
some cases a particular name may be preferred for some ZIP codes but an alias
name for other ZIP codes. This frequently occurs when the exact political
boundary between adjacent cities is obscure, leading people to use the two
city names interchangeably within the boundary area.


RECORD LAYOUT 

The data records of the ZIPList5 Max file consist of nineteen quote-delimited,
comma-separated, ASCII text fields, arranged as follows:

FIELD             TYPE                    LENGTH

City Name         Variable length ASCII   28 maximum
State Code        Fixed length ASCII      2
ZIP code          Fixed length ASCII      5 numeric characters
Area code         Fixed length ASCII      3 numeric characters
County FIPS       Fixed length ASCII      5 numeric characters
County Name       Variable length ASCII   25 alphabetic characters max
Preferred?        Fixed length ASCII      1 character: "P","A", or "N"
Time zone         Variable length ASCII   5 maximum (see below)
DST?              Fixed length ASCII      1 character: "Y" or "N"
Latitude          Fixed length ASCII      7 or 8 chars: nn.nnnn
Longitude         Variable length ASCII   8 or 9 chars: nnn.nnnn
MSA               Fixed length ASCII      4 numeric chars or blank
PMSA              Fixed length ASCII      4 numeric chars or blank
City abbreviation Variable length ASCII   13 alphabetic characters max
Market Area       Fixed length ASCII      3 numeric chars or blank
ZIP code type     Fixed length ASCII      1 char (P, U, M, or blank) 
CBSA              Fixed length            5 numeric characters or blank
Division          Fixed length            5 numeric characters or blank
Population        Variable length         10 numeric characters max

The City Name field identifies a city name associated with the ZIP code (but
NOT necessarily with the County) by the USPS. There may be several different
city names associated with a particular ZIP code. If so, the ZIP code will
appear in several different records, each with a different city name. You can
use the Prefered? field (described below) to identify the one city name which
is "preferred" by the USPS for use on mail delivered to that ZIP code.

The ZIP code field lists only valid 5-digit ZIP codes currently defined by the
USPS. Obsolete ZIP codes which have been "retired" from service by the USPS
are not included in this database. 

A particular ZIP code may appear in more than one record if the USPS has
defined more than one city name for that ZIP code. If you wish to eliminate
the "duplicate" ZIP code records, you can use the Preferred? field (described
below) to isolate those records which contain the city names "preferred" by
the USPS for mail delivery. There should be exactly one such record for each
of the approximately 43,000 active ZIP codes.

The ZIP code field is treated as a text field, not a numeric field. This is to
prevent the loss of the leading zeroes in certain ZIP codes when the data is
imported into a database program. The area code, County FIPS, Latitude,
Longitude, MSA, and PMSA fields are also treated
as text fields. Treating all fields as text fields simplifies the importing
and exporting of the data using a database program.

The County FIPS code field and the County Name field identify the one county 
that contains the largest portion of the ZIP code, even if the ZIP code lies 
in two or more counties. Please note that ZIP codes often cross county 
boundaries. ZIPList5 lists only one county for a given ZIP code no matter 
how many counties the ZIP code may cross. Our product County-ZIP Code Database 
lists every county and ZIP code combination, which is useful if you need to know 
EVERY ZIP code which lies within a particular county or all counties which 
include a portion of a particular ZIP code. If you wish to resolve an address 
to an exact county, please be aware that you cannot determine the correct county 
with 100 percent accuracy using the 5-digit ZIP code alone. For this you must 
use a different product, such as our Perfect Address, which uses the full street 
address to determine the correct county.

Note that the specified county is related to the ZIP code, NOT necessarily to the 
city name specified in that record. It is quite possible that some or all of the 
specified city may actually lie in a different county than the ZIP code (see 
discussion below). 

The County FIPS code is a 5-digit numeric field containing a unique numeric
identification assigned to each county by the US government. The county FIPS
code is actually a 3-digit code, but most people prefer to combine the 2-digit
state FIPS code with the 3-digit county FIPS code to yield a 5-digit code
which can be used to uniquely identify each county in the USA. If you do not
wish to use the county FIPS code in this way, contact CD Light to obtain a
copy of ZIPList5 with the 3-digit form of the county FIPS code. ZIPList5
includes a separate text file, stfips.txt, which defines the state FIPS codes
for all 50 states plus the territories.

The Preferred? flag can have one of three states, which indicate how that name
can be used for delivery of mail to the associated ZIP code. The three states
are:

P - This is the preferred city name for this ZIP code
A - This city name is approved (but NOT preferred) for this ZIP code
N - This city name is NOT approved for mail delivery to this ZIP code
    
For every ZIP code in the database there is one and only one record in the
database in which the Preferred? field is set to "P". This record contains the
one city name preferred by the US Postal Service for use on all mail sent to
that particular ZIP code. In addition to the record marked "P", there may be
one or more additional records with the same ZIP code in which the Preferred?
field is set to either "A" or "N". A record marked "A" contains an alternate
city name which may be used for mail delivery TO THAT ONE ZIP CODE. A record
marked "N" contains an alternate city name which is NOT approved by the US
Postal Service for mail delivery purposes to that one ZIP code. An alias city
name which is not approved for mail delivery should be changed to the
preferred city name for that same ZIP code. Note that a given city name may be
preferred for some ZIP codes and approved or not approved for other ZIP codes. 

We have included the approved and unapproved city names along with the
preferred city names because people across the country routinely use these
alternate city names in their addresses, even though these city names are not
preferred or even approved by the US Postal Service for mail delivery. You can
use these non-preferred city names to verify an address and/or ZIP code, and
then correct the city name to the preferred city name, if you wish. Using the
preferred city name for all addresses in your database helps find and
eliminate duplicate addresses in your database.

Note that in some cases a particular city name may be preferred for some ZIP
codes but an alias name (approved or not approved) for other ZIP codes. This
frequently occurs when the exact political boundary between adjacent cities is
poorly defined, leading people to use the two city names interchangeably
within the boundary area. 

Here is an example:

ZIP         Preferred     Alias                          
CODE        City Name     City Name

80014       Aurora        Denver (not approved)
80220       Denver        Aurora (not approved)
80215       Lakewood      Denver (approved}
80202       Denver        (None)

ZIP codes 80014 and 80220 fall into the boundary area between the adjacent
cities of Denver and Aurora, Colorado. Because the actual political boundary
between these two cities is not clearly defined (at least in the minds of many
people), people often get confused about the correct city name to use within
this boundary area. Although Denver is listed in the database as an alias city
name for ZIP code 80014, the USPS wants the name Denver to be changed to
Aurora. Denver is "not approved" by the USPS for use as the city name for mail
addressed to ZIP code 80014. Likewise, Aurora is listed in the database as not
approved for mail addressed to ZIP code 80220. The USPS wants Aurora to be
changed to Denver for this particular ZIP code.

However, for mail addressed to 80215, for which Lakewood is the preferred city
name, Denver is an approved city name. For mail addressed to ZIP code 80215
the USPS says Denver CAN be used as the city name, even though Lakewood is the
preferred city name. So in this case it really doesn't matter to the USPS
which city name you use on mail addressed to this particular ZIP code. Go
figure.

For ZIP code 80202 Denver is the preferred city name. For this ZIP code there
is no alias city name listed in the database. Denver, therefore, is an example
of a city name which is preferred for 80202 and 80220, approved for 80215, and
not approved for 80014. And you thought ZIP codes are so simple!

The time zone field always contains the standard time zone designation for a
particular ZIP code. If that ZIP code falls within a political entity which
participates in Daylight Saving Time (DST) during the summer months, the DST?
field is set to "Y". Otherwise the DST? field is set to "N". Note that most
(but not all) of Arizona, parts of Indiana, and all of Hawaii, Puerto Rico,
and Guam DO NOT switch to DST.

The following codes may be found in the time zone field:

  Zone       GMT     Geographic Area
  Code       Offset
  EST        GMT-5   Eastern standard time
  CST        GMT-6   Central standard time
  MST        GMT-7   Mountain standard time
  PST        GMT-8   Pacific standard time
  EST+1      GMT-4   Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, APO/FPO (Central America)
  GMT+1      GMT+1   APO/FPO (Central Europe)
  PST-1      GMT-9   Alaska (except Aleutian Islands)
  PST-2      GMT-10  Hawaii, Aleutian Islands
  PST-3      GMT-11  Pago Pago
  PST-4      GMT+12  Marshall Islands, Wake Island
  PST-5      GMT+11  Micronesia
  PST-6      GMT+10  Guam
  PST-7      GMT+9   APO/FPO (Pacific)

Note that if GMT plus the time zone offset exceeds 23, the current date must
be increased by one.

Three small eastern Alabama towns, Linett, Valley, and Phonix City, on the 
Alabama-Georgia border, observe eastern time, by local custom, instead of 
central time. However, the US Department of Transportation, which is 
responsible under federal law for regulating time zone boundaries, does not 
recognize these towns as being within the eastern time zone. Accordingly, 
we do not show the associated ZIP codes as being in the eastern time zone. 
However, you may wish to note this exception in your use of the time zone data 
in this database. The ZIP codes affected by this are:

    36854 Valley, AL      
    36863 Lanett, AL      
    36867 Phenix City, AL 
    36868 Phenix City, AL 
    36869 Phenix City, AL 
    36870 Phenix City, AL 
    36872 Valley, AL      

Likewise, the towns of Jackpot, Mountain City, and Owyhee, Nevada, in the 
northeastern corner of Nevada near the Idaho border, observe mountain time,
by local custom, instead of pacific time. The correct time zone for all of 
Nevada is pacific time, which is what we show for the ZIP codes associated 
with these towns. The ZIP codes affected by this are:

    89825 Jackpot, NV
    89831 Mountain City, NV
    89832 Owyhee, NV

The latitude and longitude fields contain the geographic coordinates in
degrees of the "centroid" of the ZIP code area. Depending upon the shape of 
the ZIP code area, the centroid may actually lie outside of the ZIP code's 
boundaries.

You may notice that some groups of ZIP codes in this database have identical 
latitude and longitude values. You might think that this is an error in the 
database. But the fact is that some ZIP codes are "point" ZIP codes, having no 
geographic delivery area. ZIP codes which are assigned to post office boxes 
only and ZIP codes which are assigned to a single company or organization are 
point ZIP codes. For point ZIP codes we provide the latitude and longitude of 
the post office which delivers mail to these ZIP codes. Since many point ZIP 
codes are served by the same post office, you may find many ZIP codes for some 
cities with identical latitude and longitude values. This same situation also 
applies to ZIP codes which have been allocated by the USPS but as yet have no 
assigned street addresses.

The ZIPList5 Max latitude and longitude values are based on the "North
American Datum 1983" (NAD-83). Please note that this is a different geodetic
"datum" from that used by GPS. GPS works in "World Geodetic System 1984".
However, most GPS units can be programmed to display latitude and longitude in
NAD-83 coordinates.

The MSA field contains the Metropolitan Statistical Area code, if any, in
which the ZIP code lies. The MSA is assigned by the US Government. See the
file msapmsa.txt (included with ZIPList5 Max) for a complete list of all
valid MSA codes.

The PMSA field contains the Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area code, if
any, in which the ZIP code lies. The PMSA is assigned by the US Government.
See the file msapmsa.txt (included with ZIPList5 Max) for a complete list of
all valid PMSA codes.

The city abbreviation field contains the official USPS city abbreviation for
most city names which exceed 13 characters. The abbreviation is limited to
a maximum of 13 characters.

The Market Area field contains the Market Area code, if any, in which the 
ZIP code lies. The Market Area is a 3-digit code assigned by CD Light.
See the file malist.txt (included with ZIPList5 Max) for a complete list 
of all valid market area codes.

The ZIP code type field identifies special kinds of ZIP codes. For normal
residential ZIP codes (which MAY include PO Boxes) this field is blank. The
following codes may appear in this field:

  P  ZIP code applies only to PO Boxes
  M  Military ZIP code (APO/FPO)
  U  "Unique" ZIP code assigned to a particular business or organization

The CBSA field contains the Metropolitan Statistical Area code or 
Micropolitan Statistical Area code, if any, in which some or all of the ZIP 
code lies. The CBSA is a 5-digit FIPS code assigned by the White House's 
Office of Management and Budget. ZIPList5 MAX includes a cross-reference 
file listing all valid metropolitan statistical areas and micropolitan 
statistical areas and their CBSA codes.

The Div field contains the Metropolitan Division code, if any, in 
which some or all of the ZIP code lies. The Metropolitan Division is a 5-digit 
FIPS code assigned by the White House's Office of Management and Budget. 
ZIPList5 Max includes a cross-reference file listing all valid Metro-
politan Division codes.

The Population field contains the Census 2010 population for the ZIP 
code, not the city. Point ZIP codes (PO Box and unique ZIP codes)  
have no population numbers.


Calculating Distance Using Latitude and Longitude

In this database, the location of ZIP codes is defined in terms of degrees of
north latitude and degrees of west longitude. Because of the spherical shape
of the Earth, calculating the exact distance between two ZIP codes requires
the use of spherical geometry and trigonometric math functions. However, you
can calculate an approximate distance using much simpler math functions. For
many applications the approximate distance calculation provides sufficient
accuracy with much less complexity.

The following approximate distance calculations are relatively simple, but can
produce distance errors of 10 percent of more. These approximate calculations
are performed using latitude and longitude values in degrees, as defined in
this database. The first approximation requires only simple math functions:

  Approximate distance in miles = sqrt(x * x + y * y)

  where   
     x = 69.1 * (zip2.lat - zip1.lat)
  and
     y = 53   * (zip2.lon - zip1.lon)

You can improve the accuracy of this approximate distance calculation by
adding the cosine math function:

  Approximate distance in miles = sqrt(x * x + y * y)

  where   
     x = 69.1 * (zip2.lat - zip1.lat)
  and
     y = 69.1 * (zip2.lon - zip1.lon) * cos(zip1.lat/57.3)

If you need greater accuracy, you must use the exact distance calculation. The
exact distance calculation requires use of spherical geometry, since the Earth
is a sphere. The exact distance calculation also requires a high level of
floating point mathematical accuracy - about 15 digits of accuracy (sometimes
called "double-precision"). Many computer languages do not provide sufficient
accuracy for this calculation. In addition, the trig math functions used in
the exact calculation require conversion of the latitude and longitude values
from degrees to radians. To convert latitude or longitude from degrees to
radians, divide the latitude and longitude values in this database by 180/pi,
or 57.2958. The radius of the Earth is assumed to be 6,371 kilometers, or
3,958.75 miles. 

If you convert all latitude and longitude values in the database to radians
before the calculation, use this equation:

  Exact distance in miles = 3958.75 * arccos[sin(zip1.lat) * 
          sin(zip2.lat) + cos(zip1.lat) *
          cos(zip2.lat) * cos(zip2.lon - zip1.lon)]

If you do NOT first convert the latitude and longitude values in the database
to radians, you must include the degrees-to-radians conversion in the
calculation. Substituting degrees for radians, the calculation becomes:

  Exact distance in miles = 3958.75 * arccos[sin(zip1.lat/57.2958) *
          sin(zip2.lat/57.2958) + 
          cos(zip1.lat/57.2958) * 
          cos(zip2.lat/57.2958) * 
          cos(zip2.lon/57.2958 - zip1.lon/57.2958)]

If the computer language you are using has no arccosine function, you can
calculate the same result using the arctangent function, which most computer
languages do support. Use the following equation:

  Exact distance in miles = 3958.75 * arctan[sqrt(1-x^2)/x]

  where x = [sin(zip1.lat/57.2958) * sin(zip2.lat/57.2958)] + 
          [cos(zip1.lat/57.2958) * 
          cos(zip2.lat/57.2958) * 
          cos(zip2.lon/57.2958 - zip1.lon/57.2958)]

Using the latitude and longitude values provided by this database, you should
be able to obtain distance accuracy of approximately +/- 36 feet.

If your distance calculations produce wildly incorrect results, check for
these possible problems:

  1.    Did you convert the latitude and longitude values from degrees to
        radians? Trigonometric math functions such as sine and cosine normally
        require conversion of degrees to radians, as described above.

  2.    Are the equations implemented correctly with necessary parentheses?
        Remember the old math precedence rule: MDAS - multiply, divide, add,
        subtract.

  3.    Does your computer language provide sufficient mathematical accuracy?
        Many languages simply do not provide the required floating point
        precision. For best results, you need about 15 digits of accuracy.
        Older versions of Basic, for example, often provide much less accuracy
        than required for the exact distance calculation.

  4.    Did you retain decimal points in the latitude and longitude values?
        When you imported the data into your database program, you may have
        lost the decimal point during the importation of latitude and longitude
        values.


MARKET AREA

The CD Light Market Area geographic scheme divides the United States into
280 market areas. Each ZIP code in all 50 states is assigned to a market area, 
with no overlap. A particular market area may be made up of counties or 
portions of counties in one, two, or more contiguous states. In all cases an 
entire county is assigned to a single market area. No ZIP code is split 
across a market area boundary.

This market area geographic system has gained general acceptance within the 
business community as a basic approach to structuring advertising and 
promotion as well as determining the extent of distribution systems, sales and 
franchise territories, etc. The market area scheme is superior to a scheme 
based on MSA/PMSA because a market area generally covers an area considerably 
larger than the equivalent MSA/PMSA, there are fewer market areas then 
MSA/PMSAs (280 versus 336), and market areas cover the entire country, while 
MSA/PMSAs omit the rural areas of most states. 


SORTED ORDER

ZIPList5 Max data records are sorted in ascending order by City Name, State
Code, and ZIP code. If you prefer to order the data by ZIP code or some other
order, we suggest that you import the data into your own database program
where you can sort the data into the order you prefer.


MILITARY ZIP CODES AND APO/FPO

The USPS delivers mail to US military installations around the world. As a
result, the USPS has assigned ZIP codes to these facilities, even though they
are actually on foreign soil. These ZIP codes have been given a state code
which generally defines the area of the world in which they are found, and a
city name of APO (Army Post Office) or FPO (Fleet Post Office). The military
ZIP codes and assigned state codes are as follows:

  ZIP Code Range         State Code  Area

  09000 - 09999            AE        Europe
  34000 - 34099            AA        Central America (Canal Zone)
  96200 - 96699            AP        Pacific

Please note that these ZIP codes lie outside the territorial boundaries of the
United States, and therefore do not include county name, county FIPS codes,
latitude, longitude, MSA, PMSA, or market area information.


ZIP Code 45275

ZIP code 45275 is unusual in that it violates the usual rules for ZIP code 
assignment.

ZIP code 45275 is assigned by the USPS to the Cincinnati - Northern Kentucky
International Airport. The USPS has assigned an Ohio ZIP code and the
preferred city name Cincinnati, Ohio to this ZIP code even though the airport
lies entirely inside of the State of Kentucky.

We have adjusted the county name, county FIPS code, area code, and other 
information to match the physical reality of Kentucky instead of Ohio. 
This means that 45275 has the county name and FIPS code of Boone County, 
Kentucky, even though it is known (by the USPS, at least) as Cincinnati, OH.


MISSING AREA CODES AND COUNTIES

All records for areas outside of the normal domestic calling areas of the
United States have the area code field set to "000". This applies primarily to
APO/FPO (military) ZIP codes and ZIP codes for some Pacific Islands. These
places also have no county FIPS code or county name.


UNUSUAL COUNTIES

Alaska Counties - Alaska officially has no counties, according to the usual
political definition of the word. Instead, Alaska has sixteen "boroughs", one
for each of the major cities. For statistical and budgetary purposes the US
Government (Census Bureau) has created eleven additional "Census Areas" to
cover the remainder of Alaska. These 27 boroughs and census areas make up the
"county equivalents" for Alaska used in this database.

Kalawao County, HI - This "county" formerly was a leper colony on the island
of Molokai. It has no county government. Many databases omit it entirely.
However, Kalawao has one small community of about 80 residents, Kalaupapa,
with its own ZIP code (96742), a post office, and mail delivery. For that
reason we have chosen to include Kalawao County in our database, even though
the USPS omits it from the "official" USPS city-state database.

Yellowstone National Park County, MT - This "county" is actually that small
part of Yellowstone National Park which lies within the borders of the state
of Montana. It has no towns, no inhabitants (unless you count the animals), no
county government, and no mail delivery. The US Government recently removed
this county from its list of "official" counties. For these reasons we have
chosen to omit it from our databases as well. Portions of this area lie within
the boundaries of three ZIP codes: 59027, 59030, and 59758, all of which are
assigned to towns in other counties.


WRONG COUNTY SHOWN FOR SOME CITIES??

ZIPList5 Max is organized as a ZIP code database. It is not really a city-
state-county database. The information in each record is related to the 5-
digit ZIP code in that record. That can lead to some combinations of city and
county which appear to be wrong. For example:

  ZIP Code           City         State     County
  80214              Denver       CO        Jefferson

Some observant people have pointed out that the city of Denver and Denver
county are geographically one and the same. Therefore if an address is in the
city of Denver, it must also be in Denver county. However, according to the US
Postal Service, the ZIPList5 Max record above is actually correct as
presented. How can that be?

One part of the answer is that ZIP code boundaries and political boundaries
almost never exactly coincide. For that reason, the county designation for a
5-digit ZIP code such as 80214 can be somewhat misleading; some addresses
within the ZIP code boundaries lie in one county and some in another. That is
the case with 80214: part of it lies in Jefferson County and part in Denver
County. To find the absolutely correct county for a given address, one must
always use the full street address or the ZIP+4, not just the 5-digit ZIP
code. Our product Perfect Address does this.

By examining the address data for ZIP code 80214 contained in the National
ZIP+4 Address Database (one of our other products), you would find that 1,749
address records indicate Jefferson County, while only 31 indicate Denver
County. Clearly at the 5-digit level Jefferson County is the correct county
designation for ZIP code 80214. That is the reason the USPS designates 80214
as Jefferson County.

The next question is what city name should be applied to 80214. This question
is not always easy to answer. The USPS explains that their "official" address
database is maintained by 159 different local "address management" offices
scattered across the nation. Each is responsible for all addresses within its
local district.

Now how are city names handled in the Denver regional address management
office? That is hard to say. As in most states, some parts of Colorado lie in
"unincorporated county" areas, where there is no "official" city designation.
For example, this writer once lived in an unincorporated area of Jefferson
County, which, for postal purposes, was given the name of the nearest town
within that ZIP code: Golden. So Golden was the city name of my address, even
though I lived miles outside the city limits of Golden. This same situation
seems to be true for ZIP code 80214. The people who live in 80214 are probably
happy to be called "Denver". Thirty-one address records actually do exist in
Denver city and county, while the rest lie in that unincorporated area of
Jefferson County which has no city name. Hence Denver becomes the most logical
city name to apply to 80214, even though more of 80214 lies within Jefferson
County than Denver County. Again, this decision was made by the USPS. So we
end up with a ZIPList5 Max record for ZIP code 80214 showing the city name of
Denver but a county name of Jefferson. Don't you just love it!


DO ZIP CODES EVER CHANGE?

Yes, ZIP codes do change, and far more often than you might imagine. Many
parts of the country are growing, with new subdivisions and streets being
added daily. As the population density increases in urban areas, apartment
buildings replace single-family dwellings. The US Postal Service is constantly
forced to add more ZIP+4 codes just to handle the growth. And just like area
codes, a given 5-digit ZIP code can reach its ZIP+4 expansion limit. This
forces the USPS to split existing ZIP codes and add new ZIP codes. When ZIP
code ranges become too fragmented or because of USPS service area changes,
entire ranges of 5-digit ZIP codes are sometimes "realigned". This happened on
July 1, 1996, on July 1, 1997, and again on July 1, 1998. Such realignments
can affect hundreds of thousands of addresses. It isn't unusual for hundreds
of new 5-digit ZIP codes to be assigned or hundreds to be deleted by the USPS
in each calender quarter.

Another source of change in ZIPList5 Max is area code splits.


QUARTERLY AND MONTHLY ZIPList5 Max UPDATES AVAILABLE

With all these changes happening so fast, it is hard to keep up. That is why
we offer quarterly and monthly updates for ZIPList5 Max. If you need the most
current ZIP code and area code information, we suggest a quarterly or monthly
subscription to ZIPList5 Max. A quarterly subscription consists of four
quarterly releases (the current version plus the next three quarterly
updates). A monthly subscription consists of 12 monthly releases (the current
version plus the next 11 monthly updates). Order once, pay once, and receive a
full year's worth of the latest ZIP code data. Best of all, we offer this
service at a discounted price. If you did not specify a subscription when you
placed your original order, contact CD Light within 30 days of your original
purchase. We will convert your order to a subscription, and credit your
original purchase price toward the subscription fee. For more details, see our
Internet site, www.zipinfo.com, or call us at 866-256-2042.


ERRORS and OMISSIONS

We have created ZIPList5 Max with care and considerable effort. The data is
as accurate as we can reasonably make it. We recognize, of course, that errors
are bound to exist, and that, over time, the data will become "out-of-date".
If you find errors, we would like to hear from you. Please send corrections to
us via any of these methods:

Voice      866-256-2042 or 281-292-3270
email      support@zipinfo.com

CD Light, LLC d.b.a. ZipInfo.com(TM)
www.zipinfo.com
#
